---
layout: post
title:  "You don't need to impress everyone"

---

I have been very particular about the people I want to spend my time with, both in my professional life as well as personal. I am friends with only around 5 people from my CouponDunia days. 5 from Craftsvilla. 3 from Directi. Maybe another 5 in my current company. Is it "in" or "at"? Not sure. Grammar has never been my strength. Let's move on.

Similarly, I can count the number of people, who I won't have to think twice before calling, in my hand. It is not a long list. I say [No](https://manassaloi.com/2020/05/16/no-default.html) a lot.

But the best part is that I can call them at midnight without any worry if there is anything I want to talk about. I can open up, talk without judgment. I am free around them. I can do a startup with them someday.  

There are a lot of people who subtweet me on Twitter. A lot of them get triggered by my tweets. But then there are people who WhatsApp me screenshots of things they liked reading on my blog. I have always focused on the later than worry about the first. Why impress strangers on the internet when you won't ever meet them? Their opinion should not matter, good or bad.

When it comes to networking, a lot of people run after connections. They want to connect with everyone. They want to "network". Form ties. In my case, I have always tried to create my own tribe; my own kind of people. I don't need ten thousand connections on Linkedin to validate my professional career. Nor do I need a hundred people to hang out with.

A few friends are more than enough.

Stay up to date with my latest posts/tweets here: [@manas_saloi](http://twitter.com/manas_saloi)
