---
layout: post
title:  "How to write 100+ blogposts a year"
---

Less douchy title: How to write more.

What I do to write more:

1. Dump all my thoughts on Twitter threads: Unfiltered ramblings just to get out my thoughts on a topic. Then I copy paste the thread content on a draft email. All my draft posts are on gmail.

  - People think I spend a lot of time writing online, be it on Twitter or my blog. It is not true. I have been writing online for 10+ years. Started with a campus satire blog called Tamatar News. Once something becomes a habit, it is very easy to do it on autopilot without thinking about it.
2. Thought dump on [Inkpad](https://manassaloi.com/2019/11/24/build-measure-learn.html). I use Inkpad for notetaking. I keep thinking about all sorts of topics. I will have an idea about how to build a new on demand marketplace at midnight, and considering I don't have access to Twitter to thought dump then, I would just add it to Inkpad.
3. [Take notes](https://manassaloi.com/2019/03/08/how-to-learn.html) whenever I am consuming podcasts/articles/books.
4. Turn [templates I use at work](https://manassaloi.com/2020/03/23/running-product-team.html) into blogposts.
5. Add notes from interesting discussions I have with friends and mentors.
6. When I am feeling lazy, I use [voice notes](https://manassaloi.com/2021/09/28/live-transcribe.html).
7. Thought dumping and editing happens in separate sessions. Hence you will see me add threads I wrote weeks back into blogposts much later.
8. Focus on reducing friction in my writing process. If I plan to sit and write a post, I know I will never get it done. So I find it easier to just dump all my thoughts without worrying about the end result.
9. Accept your strengths help. I know that I will never have the patience or rigor to write like Ben Thompson. Hence I default to what I call "unfiltered thoughts." These can be thought of as rough notes for myself. My writing style is also pretty simple.
10. Once I post a blogpost, I might edit it based on feedback from friends.
11. Hate proofreading. So all posts will have typos and grammatical errors. I fix them ove time.
12. Most of my posts are thoughtdumps. Hence I sometimes overshare info about my personal life/ feel guilty about writing on some sensitive topic/ get too blunt. In those cases I just edit my writings later.
13. All my posts are live posts. I keep adding more content/editing them for years.
14. I overindex on getting something I wrote out fast.
15. Use bullet points because figuring out structure of a post is too much effort.
16. People think I spend a lot of time writing online, be it on Twitter or my blog. It is not true. I have been writing online for 10+ years. Started with a campus satire blog called Tamatar News. Once something becomes a habit, it is very easy to do it on autopilot without thinking about it.
  - Writing a shit post: One minute.
  - 5 shit posts a day = 5 minutes.
  - A thread (mostly unplanned, based on vibe and something that is more of a thought dump): 15 mins.  
  - Turning the thread into a post: Another 15 mins.
  - Total time =  Less than an hour everyday.
  - I honestly spend far more time getting pissed off at replies from people who come to argue with me online, but that is another story.
