---
layout: post
title:  "the replyboi"
---

reply boy discovers a twitter account. starts following the account. likes, retweets regularly. forms a parasocial relationship. gets upset when the account posts a view they don't agree. they complain. why are you attacking my identity. i thought you loved web3. how can you say this. oh, i thought you are also from BITS, how can you insult our college. oh, you want to get more hits to your blog. that's it. you are not any different. i loved you because i thought we were part of the same tribe. we wear the same labels. let us make fun of the other labels. the account says nope, it does't believe in labels, and will tweet whatever comes to its mind.

replyboi thinks he has the right to argue because he invested on the account through his likes. he gets upset whenever the account does not give what he wants. the weird bit: the account never asked for repybois. the account just wants the freedom to post whatever they want. account would turn off replies from its tweets, but the replyboi would QT. how can you not hear what i have to say. i like your stuff. we are friends. you were not like this earlier. once upon a time we even exchanged DMs. account never said it is an equal relationship. the  online familiarity is an illusion. actually they are all strangers. the account does not even know the existence of all the replybois. the account does not owe anything to anyone. the account begs to be left alone in peace. please don't try to pick a fight, the account has the right to clapback. replyboi says how arrogant. the account says it will block the replyboi. replyboi is mad. aah, how can you do that. i liked you so much. how you betray me. i will unfollow you. and talk about how you are an ass. we are not friends anymore.

replyboi leaves. another replyboi takes his place. and the cycle continues.

the account had not changed. it has been thought dumping for more than a decade without asking for anything back. all it wants is to shitpost in peace. empty its mind. save the therapy cost. but it is too much to ask. it knows that.

note: i had posted this note yesterday on twitter and a few friends DMed me on whatsapp to tell me that I am getting sucked into too many twitter arguments. as a twitter account grows, the quality of the average follower goes down. and there is a lot of stupid replies. now the account has only a few options: become a fortune cookie, ignore all replies, clapback, or delete the account. i deleted my quora account when i just could not be bothered anymore. i don't wish to become a fortune cookie. so i will clapback till i can. and then delete if i find myself wasting my time getting into pointless arguments.
