---
layout: post
title:  "Shakth Jaw"
---

One interesting founder everyone should study is Sanjeev Juneja. He created Kesh King, Dr. Ortho, and Pet Safa – each designed around insecurities of middle-aged Indian men. His podcast with Shantanu Deshpande is one of the highest insights-per-minute podcasts I have ever listened to.

I remembered him while listening to this My First Million podcast with a guy who has minted $100 million selling on TikTok Shop. TikTok is not available here, but it is huge in Southeast Asia. Everyone in Indonesia has a side business. You have people selling everything from umbrellas to toys. I know Meesho is trying to help creators monetize better through stores, but I think more people will become influencers in India, and they will monetize through commerce and not just ads.

I saw a fitness influencer on Instagram who is blowing up. He shows up with Ramdev. All videos are of him appearing in small towns. He won't sell high Average Order Value items to Gen Z in Bengaluru. But he might sell to Gen Z in small towns. So everything from name to branding to distribution can be learned from people like Sanjeev who has succeeded selling in small towns.

In the My First Million episode, they were talking about "lookmaxing" for Gen Z and selling chewing gums for their jawline. What would be a similar product for Indian tier-3 town audience? Need to get Rajkumar Rao to promote the lookmaxing jawline product and sell them at the paan shops. It will be called Shakth Jaw. Distribution will be through popular influencers on Instagram Reels.

Need to create an affiliate program that will make Hustler University seem like kindergarten.

This will happen in the next 2 years.
